All right so this is the fun part adjusted R-squared.
So here we've got a simple inner aggression.
We've talked about how the R-Squared is derived so what the formula one R-Squared is it's equal to one
minus sum of squares of residuals divided by total sum of squares where some goalscorers of residuals
is the sum of squares of the distances from the observations to your fitted line so we don't see it
here that's your linear a simple linear regression line that we fit onto our daughter and the sum total
sum of squares we can see it here.
So that's just total sum of those squares of those red lines we can see here so the difference between
your observations and the average.
So basically R-Squared is telling us how well is your model fitted to the daughter in fact how much
better is it fitted than the average line that she can just draw through her daughter very easily.
So let's get rid of all of that and put all R-squared for me on the left for a second.
Now we talked about R-squared for a simple linear regression.
Well the same concepts apply for a multiple in your regression.
So for instance with two variables R-squared would be calculated in the same way.
We're just not going to go through all these derivations right now because it's just easier to visualize
the way we've done it.
And that's exactly the same concepts apply to a multiple linear regression and still.
So what that means is that all ordinary least squares method is used.
And the best fitting is a multiple regression is the one that has the least sum of squares of residual
So you're trying to minimize the sum of squares of residual and I bring that up well we'll need that
in a second.
So we want to use R-squared as we discussed as a goodness of fit parameters so the bigger it is the
better the closer it is to one the better your model.
That's awesome.
We can totally try doing that but there is one problem and the problem is or starts occur when you add
more variables to your model.
So here you can see we've got two variables in our multiple integration what will happen if we add a
third variable to our model.
Think of it as an example let's look at that example with a salary.
So your salary equals to a constant 30000 plus 10000 times the years of experience plus for instance
BE2 could be a constant hour coefficient times the number of qualifications you have.
And I don't know and B-3 could be how much how much money you brought the company in the previous year
so if you're a salesman for instance so it coefficient times the amount of dollars that you brought
the company in the previous year something like that.
So you can keep adding on variables that you think are actually impacting the outcome so are impacting
the dependent variable and you want to fit and model and see if it's better or not so in this case we're
adding a third variable.
We already have a model with two variables and it works okay.
And now we want to add a third variable and see if maybe using a third variable we can fit our model
even better so we can create an even better model with three variables.
So how can we judge that after we've added all Berbel and we've run the model.
We can look at the R-squared did the R-squared get better or worse.
So in fact did the R-squared increase or did it decrease or stay the same.
So the problem here is that R-squared because of these two things are separate will never decrease.
And let's go through that in a bit more detail.
I'm going to use my mouse here because this is quite an important part.
So R-squared over here is equal to 1 minus some squared of residual divide by some square of the total
.
So once you add a new variable to your model.
Right.
Is going to somehow affect what the model looks like and the fact that we're trying to minimize the
sum of squares of residual.
What that means is that either this new variable will help minimize the somewhat square of residual
somehow the regression process will find a way to give it a coefficient that will help minimize the
sum of square residuals.
And then in that case R-squared will happen to us squared.
Will be one minus something that is less than it used to be.
Right.
Divided by the same value because we by adding a new variable were not affecting the observations were
not affecting the averages of their observations right.
This does not change.
So by adding new variable the regression processes through this condition we'll definitely try to minimize
this value make it even smaller than it is currently.
And that way this whole part will decrease and this whole part will increase.
So you are going to increase if it so happens that the new variable that's added whatever coefficient
you give it a new coefficient you give it.
If you cannot decrease SS residual right what will happen.
Well this coefficient will just become zero.
It very rarely happens I don't think I've ever seen a coefficient like B exactly zero.
And I'll tell you just now why.
But in the worst case scenario the regression process will say now this variable is you know completely
just making the world model definitely worse so I'll just put a 0 instead of this coefficient and forget
about it and that way.
SS residual won't change and R-squared won't change.
So you only have two options.
Either R-squared will increase or it won't change at all.
So R-squared will never decrease.
If you add variables and why say that B-3 is never equal to exactly zero because they can always be
or there will always be at least a slight random correlation between the independent on the dependent
variable.
Doesn't matter what you put in here.
So even in the example when we're looking at salary so salary equals years of experience plus how many
how much I mean qualifications a person has and then we can add in what is the last digit of the person
of the person's mobile number.
Right.
Of course that is not going to.
It doesn't have any correlation with the independent variable.
What sort of that will there is no causative factor there's no association between the lozenge of your
mobile number has no effect on your salary.
But if we add that in and they'll will randomly be a slight correlation you know.
It'll just be a random correlation and the regression process will pick it up and I'll give it a.
And R-squared will probably decrease by that tiny little or increase by that tiny little bit.
And so that is why there's a problem with R-squared.
You can add variables and you will not know if those variables are helping your model or if they're
not helping because you're R-Squared is going to is biased is basically always increasing regardless
of the actual improvement or not improvement in fit.
So we've got to come up with different parameter to measure goodness of fit and that is where adjusted
R-squared comes in.
This is the form of our adjusted R-squared.
Here is the number of regressors.
So the number of independent variables and is the sample size so it's over here.
Now they say that adjusted R-squared has a penalization factor.
It penalizes you for adding independent variables that don't help your model.
And let's talk about that.
That's the important bit about just Herskowitz so p is a number of independent malls.
Let's look at P..
PS here is in the bottom in the denominator.
That means that when PPI increases when you increase the number of independent variables.
This whole part decreases.
And when this whole part decreases the denominator decreases the ratio increases and as the ratio increases
this whole bid increases as well.
And as this Holbert increases one minus minuses hold decreases.
So as you can see as you're adding more regressors the adjusted R-squared is decreasing and going further
away from one.
And that is the important part.
Also you can see here what happens when R-squared increases when just normal R-squared increases R-squared
increases.
So this part decreases right.
One might as R-squared decreases and that means that this whole part increases.
So you've got a battle here on one hand R-squared by adding a new variable you're increasing R-squared
So you're increasing adjusted R-squared.
But on the other hand by adding numerable you increase PPI So you're decreasing adjusted R-squared.
And in that sense is a fair like it's a fair battle here.
If your variable is not good is not helping the model then adjusted R-squared this will be an insignificant
increase and this penalization factor will actually drive R-squared down adjusted R-squared down.
If on the other hand your new variable that you added is helping to model a lot then the increase in
R-squared will be substantial and it will overwhelm this penalization factor so even though you'll still
get penalized for adding a variable that increase the benefit to the model will be so great that even
that justed R-squared will go up.
And so that's how the adjusted R-squared basically works.
It's it's a very good metric it helps you understand whether you're adding good variables to model or
not and we'll be using adjusted R-squared throughout this course to make sure our models are robust
when we're building them